Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
applied respiratory physiology in anaesthesia.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Define hypoxia and describe its classification.
Hypoxia is the state in which the supply of oxygen to the tissues is inadequate for
their metabolic needs, and it is usefully classified by the point at which the
delivery of oxygen fails, because this directs the diagnosis and treatment — a
framework following the oxygen pathway from the lungs to the mitochondria.
There are four classic types.
Hypoxic hypoxia is a low arterial oxygen tension,
from the respiratory causes — a low inspired oxygen, hypoventilation,
ventilation-perfusion mismatch, shunt or diffusion impairment;
here the oxygen content is low because the blood is poorly oxygenated.
Anaemic hypoxia is a reduced oxygen-carrying capacity despite a normal arterial
oxygen tension, from a low or dysfunctional haemoglobin — as in anaemia or carbon
monoxide poisoning; the content is low though the tension is normal.
Stagnant, or circulatory, hypoxia is inadequate delivery from a low blood flow,
as in shock or local ischaemia, despite normal arterial oxygen content.
Histotoxic hypoxia is the failure of the tissues to use the oxygen delivered,
as in cyanide poisoning, which poisons the cellular respiration.
So hypoxia, the inadequate oxygen supply to the tissues,
is classified as hypoxic — a low arterial oxygen tension;
anaemic — a reduced carrying capacity; stagnant — inadequate flow;
and histotoxic — a failure of tissue oxygen use;
a classification following the oxygen pathway and directing the diagnosis and
treatment of the failure of oxygenation.
Describe the oxygen cascade.
The oxygen cascade is the concept of the stepwise fall in the partial pressure of
oxygen from the atmosphere to its point of use in the mitochondria,
each step representing a process where oxygen is diluted, taken up or consumed,
and it is a unifying framework for understanding oxygenation and its failure.
The cascade begins with the dry atmospheric air,
where oxygen has its highest partial pressure,
around twenty-one kilopascals at sea level.
The first fall is in the airways, where the inspired gas is humidified,
the added water vapour diluting the oxygen.
The next, larger fall is in the alveolus,
where the oxygen is diluted by the carbon dioxide present and continuously removed
into the blood — the alveolar oxygen calculated by the alveolar gas equation.
A small further fall occurs between the alveolus and the arterial blood — the
alveolar-arterial difference — from the normal slight mismatch and shunt.
The oxygen then falls further from the arterial blood to the tissue capillaries and
into the cell, reaching its lowest level in the mitochondria, where it is consumed.
So the oxygen cascade is the progressive fall in oxygen partial pressure from the
atmosphere — through humidification in the airway,
dilution and uptake in the alveolus, the alveolar-arterial difference,
and consumption in the tissues — to its lowest level in the mitochondria;
a framework showing where, at each step, oxygenation may be impaired,
and uniting the determinants of tissue oxygen delivery.
Describe cyanosis and its limitations as a sign.
Cyanosis is the bluish discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes that occurs
when the blood contains an increased amount of deoxygenated haemoglobin,
and although it is a useful clinical sign of hypoxaemia,
it has important limitations that follow from its dependence on the absolute amount
of deoxyhaemoglobin.
Cyanosis appears when the concentration of deoxygenated haemoglobin in the blood
exceeds a threshold of around five grams per decilitre.
Two kinds are described: central cyanosis, seen in the tongue and mucous membranes,
reflecting arterial desaturation from a respiratory or cardiac cause;
and peripheral cyanosis, seen in the extremities,
from a sluggish peripheral circulation with increased extraction,
as in cold or low output, with normal arterial saturation.
The limitations arise from the threshold being an absolute amount of
deoxyhaemoglobin: in anaemia, there may be insufficient total haemoglobin to
produce the threshold amount of deoxyhaemoglobin even when severely hypoxaemic,
so cyanosis may be absent despite dangerous hypoxia; conversely, in polycythaemia,
cyanosis appears readily.
It is also a subjective and late sign.
So cyanosis is the bluish discoloration appearing when deoxygenated haemoglobin
exceeds about five grams per decilitre,
central reflecting arterial desaturation and peripheral reflecting increased
extraction; but because it depends on the absolute amount of deoxyhaemoglobin,
it is unreliable — absent in anaemia despite hypoxia and exaggerated in
polycythaemia — a useful but limited and late sign.
Describe the principles of oxygen therapy.
Oxygen therapy is the administration of oxygen at a concentration higher than that
of air, to treat or prevent hypoxaemia and tissue hypoxia,
and its rational use rests on understanding which type of hypoxia will respond and
on the principles of delivery and of safety.
Its purpose is to raise the arterial oxygen and so the oxygen delivery to the
tissues.
It is most effective in hypoxic hypoxia from hypoventilation,
ventilation-perfusion mismatch and diffusion impairment,
where raising the inspired oxygen raises the arterial oxygen;
it is less effective against a true shunt, where the blood bypasses the alveoli,
and it does not correct the underlying deficit in anaemic or stagnant hypoxia,
though it modestly increases the dissolved oxygen.
Delivery devices are of two kinds: variable-performance devices,
such as simple masks and nasal cannulae,
deliver an inspired concentration that varies with the flow and the patient's
breathing; fixed-performance devices, such as Venturi masks, deliver a controlled,
known concentration regardless of breathing.
Oxygen is titrated to a target saturation,
avoiding both hypoxaemia and unnecessary hyperoxia,
with particular caution in those dependent on hypoxic drive.
So oxygen therapy raises the arterial oxygen to treat hypoxaemia,
being effective in hypoxic hypoxia but limited against shunt and not correcting
anaemic or stagnant hypoxia; delivered by variable- or fixed-performance devices
and titrated to a target saturation,
with caution in hypoxic-drive-dependent patients — a fundamental and
carefully-controlled therapy.
Describe the classification of respiratory failure.
Respiratory failure is the failure of the respiratory system to maintain adequate
gas exchange, defined by the arterial blood gases,
and it is classified into two types according to the carbon dioxide,
because they have different mechanisms and management.
Type one, or hypoxaemic, respiratory failure is a low arterial oxygen with a normal
or low carbon dioxide.
It arises from conditions that impair oxygenation while ventilation is maintained
or increased — ventilation-perfusion mismatch, shunt, and diffusion problems,
as in pneumonia, pulmonary oedema, embolism and the acute respiratory distress
syndrome; the hypoxaemia drives ventilation,
keeping the carbon dioxide normal or low.
Type two, or hypercapnic, respiratory failure is a high arterial carbon dioxide,
with hypoxaemia.
It arises from a failure of alveolar ventilation — the lung is not being adequately
ventilated, whether from reduced drive, as with drugs or central causes;
from pump failure, as in neuromuscular disease or chest-wall problems;
or from a greatly increased load or dead space, as in severe airway obstruction.
So respiratory failure is the failure of adequate gas exchange,
classified as type one — hypoxaemia with a normal or low carbon dioxide,
from impaired oxygenation with maintained ventilation;
and type two — hypercapnia with hypoxaemia, from a failure of alveolar ventilation,
whether from reduced drive, pump failure or excessive load;
a distinction directing the diagnosis and the respiratory support.
Describe the physiological effects of hypercapnia and hypocapnia.
The arterial carbon dioxide has widespread physiological effects beyond its role in
acid-base balance, and both its elevation and its reduction produce characteristic
changes, important in anaesthesia where the carbon dioxide is often altered.
Hypercapnia — a raised carbon dioxide — has these effects:
it is a respiratory stimulant, increasing ventilation,
until very high levels cause narcosis and depression;
it causes a respiratory acidosis; it stimulates the sympathetic nervous system,
raising the heart rate, blood pressure and arrhythmias,
while directly tending to depress the myocardium and dilate vessels;
it is a potent cerebral vasodilator,
raising cerebral blood flow and intracranial pressure;
and it shifts the oxygen dissociation curve to the right, aiding oxygen unloading.
Hypocapnia — a low carbon dioxide, as from hyperventilation — has largely opposite
effects: a respiratory alkalosis; cerebral vasoconstriction,
reducing cerebral blood flow, which can cause cerebral ischaemia and is exploited
and feared in neuroanaesthesia; a leftward shift of the dissociation curve
impairing unloading; and a lowering of ionised calcium causing tetany.
So hypercapnia stimulates ventilation and the sympathetic system,
causes a respiratory acidosis, dilates the cerebral vessels raising intracranial
pressure, and shifts the dissociation curve right;
while hypocapnia causes a respiratory alkalosis,
cerebral vasoconstriction reducing cerebral blood flow, a leftward curve shift,
and reduced ionised calcium — effects of major relevance to anaesthesia,
especially in neuroanaesthesia.
Pull it together: how is the physiology of oxygenation applied in anaesthesia?
I would draw it together around the central preoccupation of the anaesthetist with
maintaining the oxygenation of the tissues,
applying the whole chain of respiratory physiology from the inspired gas to the
mitochondria.
The oxygen cascade frames it: oxygen must pass from the inspired gas,
through the alveolus, across the blood-gas barrier, be carried by the haemoglobin,
delivered by the circulation, and used by the cells — and the anaesthetist guards
each step.
Oxygenation is supported by giving an adequate inspired oxygen and by
pre-oxygenation, which fills the functional residual capacity to delay
desaturation; by maintaining ventilation and lung volume against the atelectasis
and shunt that anaesthesia causes, using positive end-expiratory pressure and
recruitment; by ensuring an adequate haemoglobin and cardiac output for delivery;
and by recognising and treating the types of hypoxia and respiratory failure.
Throughout, the carbon dioxide is controlled,
with its effects on the cerebral circulation and elsewhere in mind.
So the physiology of oxygenation is applied in anaesthesia along the whole oxygen
cascade — securing the inspired oxygen and pre-oxygenation,
maintaining ventilation and lung volume against atelectasis,
ensuring delivery by haemoglobin and circulation,
and managing the types of hypoxia and respiratory failure while controlling the
carbon dioxide; an integrated application of respiratory physiology that is the
daily work of keeping the anaesthetised patient oxygenated.
Describe the determinants of oxygen delivery to the tissues.
The delivery of oxygen to the tissues — the oxygen flux — is the central quantity
in oxygenation, and it depends on the product of the cardiac output and the oxygen
content of the arterial blood, so that adequate oxygenation requires both an
adequate circulation and an adequate blood oxygen.
In words, the oxygen delivery equals the cardiac output multiplied by the arterial
oxygen content.
The arterial oxygen content is itself determined chiefly by the haemoglobin
concentration and its saturation, since most oxygen is carried bound to
haemoglobin: the content equals the haemoglobin concentration times the saturation
times the constant for the oxygen carried per gram of haemoglobin,
plus the small amount dissolved, which is proportional to the oxygen tension.
So the three main determinants of delivery are the cardiac output,
the haemoglobin concentration, and the arterial oxygen saturation;
a fall in any of these reduces delivery.
This explains why hypoxia may arise from circulatory failure, from anaemia,
or from a low saturation, and why the treatment differs accordingly.
So oxygen delivery is the product of the cardiac output and the arterial oxygen
content, the content depending chiefly on the haemoglobin concentration and its
saturation, with a small dissolved component;
the three determinants — cardiac output,
haemoglobin and saturation — each capable of reducing delivery,
which directs the assessment and treatment of inadequate tissue oxygenation.
Describe the principles and pitfalls of pulse oximetry.
Pulse oximetry is the continuous, non-invasive measurement of the arterial oxygen
saturation, one of the most valuable monitors in anaesthesia,
and its principles and its pitfalls follow from the way it measures saturation by
light absorption.
It works on two principles: spectrophotometry and plethysmography.
Oxygenated and deoxygenated haemoglobin absorb red and infrared light differently,
so by passing two wavelengths through a tissue such as a fingertip and measuring
the absorption, the proportion of oxygenated haemoglobin — the saturation — can be
derived; and by analysing only the pulsatile component of the absorption,
which comes from the arterial blood, it measures the arterial,
not venous or tissue, saturation.
Its pitfalls are important: it is unreliable at low saturations,
where it is less accurate; it cannot distinguish abnormal haemoglobins — reading
falsely high in carbon monoxide poisoning,
where carboxyhaemoglobin absorbs like oxyhaemoglobin,
and being unreliable in methaemoglobinaemia; it fails with poor perfusion,
movement, and certain dyes and nail varnish; and, being a measure of saturation,
it is insensitive to high oxygen tensions on the flat part of the dissociation
curve, and lags behind acute changes.
So pulse oximetry measures arterial saturation from the differential light
absorption of oxy- and deoxyhaemoglobin in the pulsatile signal;
its pitfalls include inaccuracy at low saturation,
false readings with carbon monoxide and methaemoglobin,
failure with poor perfusion or movement,
and insensitivity to high oxygen tensions — a valuable monitor whose limitations
must be understood.
Describe carbon monoxide poisoning and its effects on oxygen transport.
Carbon monoxide poisoning is a cause of severe tissue hypoxia that illustrates
several principles of oxygen transport,
because carbon monoxide interferes with oxygen carriage and delivery in more than
one way, while leaving the arterial oxygen tension normal.
Carbon monoxide binds to haemoglobin at the same sites as oxygen but with an
affinity some two hundred and fifty times greater, forming carboxyhaemoglobin;
so even small concentrations of carbon monoxide occupy a large proportion of the
haemoglobin, reducing the amount available to carry oxygen — in effect an anaemic
hypoxia, the oxygen content being reduced though the dissolved oxygen and so the
arterial tension is normal.
Worse, the binding of carbon monoxide to some of the haem sites increases the
affinity of the remaining sites for oxygen,
shifting the dissociation curve to the left,
so the oxygen that is carried is released less readily to the tissues.
Carbon monoxide also binds to other haem proteins, impairing cellular respiration.
The pulse oximeter reads falsely normal,
since it cannot distinguish carboxyhaemoglobin.
Treatment is with high-concentration oxygen, which displaces the carbon monoxide.
So carbon monoxide poisoning causes tissue hypoxia by binding haemoglobin with high
affinity to form carboxyhaemoglobin, reducing the oxygen-carrying capacity,
and by shifting the dissociation curve left, impairing oxygen release,
while the arterial oxygen tension and the pulse oximeter read normal;
treated by high-concentration oxygen — an instructive disturbance of oxygen
transport.
Describe oxygen toxicity.
Oxygen, though essential, is toxic in high concentrations and over prolonged
exposure, and an understanding of oxygen toxicity tempers the use of high inspired
oxygen, balancing the prevention of hypoxia against the risk of harm.
The toxicity arises from the generation of reactive oxygen species — free radicals
such as the superoxide and hydroxyl radicals and hydrogen peroxide — which are
produced in increased amounts when the oxygen tension is high,
and which damage cell membranes, proteins and nucleic acids when they overwhelm the
body's antioxidant defences.
The effects depend on the tension and duration.
In the lungs, prolonged breathing of a high oxygen concentration causes a
tracheobronchitis and, with continued exposure,
diffuse alveolar damage resembling the acute respiratory distress syndrome,
with impaired gas exchange.
At very high pressures, as in hyperbaric oxygen,
central nervous system toxicity occurs, with convulsions.
In the premature newborn, high oxygen contributes to retinopathy of prematurity and
to lung injury. High oxygen also promotes absorption atelectasis.
These risks argue for using the lowest oxygen concentration that maintains adequate
oxygenation.
So oxygen toxicity arises from the increased generation of reactive oxygen species
at high oxygen tensions, overwhelming antioxidant defences and damaging tissues;
causing pulmonary damage with prolonged high concentrations,
central nervous system convulsions at hyperbaric pressures,
and retinopathy in the premature — risks that, with absorption atelectasis,
argue for titrating oxygen to the lowest adequate concentration.
Describe the conditioning of inspired gases and the importance of humidification.
The inspired gas is normally warmed,
humidified and filtered by the upper airway before reaching the lungs,
and when this conditioning is bypassed or impaired, as in anaesthesia,
humidification must be provided, because the delivery of cold,
dry gas to the airway is harmful.
Normally the nose and upper airway warm the inspired air to body temperature and
saturate it with water vapour by the time it reaches the trachea,
so that the alveoli receive fully conditioned gas; on expiration,
some of this heat and water is recovered.
The conditioning protects the airway lining and maintains the function of the
mucociliary escalator, which depends on a moist surface.
In anaesthesia, the upper airway is bypassed by a tracheal tube,
and dry medical gases are delivered, so cold, dry gas reaches the lower airway;
this impairs ciliary function and mucus clearance, dries and damages the mucosa,
thickens secretions, and causes heat and water loss contributing to hypothermia.
Humidification is therefore provided, by heat and moisture exchangers,
which recover the patient's own expired heat and water,
or by active heated humidifiers.
So the upper airway normally warms, humidifies and filters the inspired gas,
protecting the mucosa and the mucociliary escalator;
when bypassed by a tracheal tube delivering cold dry gas,
ciliary function and secretions are impaired and heat and water are lost,
so humidification — by heat and moisture exchangers or heated humidifiers — is
provided, conditioning the gas as the upper airway would.
Describe methaemoglobinaemia.
Methaemoglobinaemia is a condition in which an abnormal proportion of the
haemoglobin is present as methaemoglobin, which cannot carry oxygen,
causing a functional anaemia and impaired oxygen delivery,
and it is relevant to anaesthesia because certain drugs can precipitate it.
In methaemoglobin, the iron of the haem is in the oxidised,
ferric state rather than the normal reduced, ferrous state;
in this form it cannot bind oxygen,
so the affected haemoglobin is useless for carriage — reducing the oxygen-carrying
capacity like an anaemia.
Moreover, the presence of methaemoglobin shifts the dissociation curve of the
remaining normal haemoglobin to the left, impairing oxygen release.
Normally a small amount of methaemoglobin is continuously formed and reduced back
by enzyme systems, chiefly methaemoglobin reductase;
methaemoglobinaemia arises when its formation is increased by oxidising drugs and
chemicals — including certain local anaesthetics such as prilocaine,
and other agents — or when the reducing systems are deficient.
It causes a cyanosis unresponsive to oxygen and a characteristic falsely-abnormal
pulse oximeter reading, and is treated, when significant, with methylene blue,
which accelerates the reduction.
So methaemoglobinaemia is the presence of oxidised,
ferric methaemoglobin that cannot carry oxygen and shifts the curve left,
causing a functional anaemia; arising from oxidising drugs such as prilocaine or
from enzyme deficiency, causing oxygen-unresponsive cyanosis,
and treated with methylene blue — a disturbance of oxygen carriage of relevance to
anaesthesia.
Describe the hazards of oxygen therapy,
particularly in the chronically hypercapnic patient.
Although oxygen is given to treat hypoxaemia,
it carries hazards that require it to be administered thoughtfully,
the most discussed being the risk of worsening hypercapnia in certain patients with
chronic respiratory disease.
In the patient with chronic carbon dioxide retention,
the carbon-dioxide drive to breathe is blunted, as we have discussed,
and such a patient may rely more on their hypoxic drive.
Giving them a high concentration of oxygen can worsen their hypercapnia by several
mechanisms: relieving the hypoxic drive may reduce their ventilation;
the rise in oxygen releases the hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction,
worsening ventilation-perfusion matching and increasing dead space;
and oxygenated haemoglobin carries less carbon dioxide, the Haldane effect.
The carbon dioxide may then rise to narcotic levels.
The lesson is not to withhold oxygen — hypoxia kills — but to titrate it carefully
to a controlled, modest target saturation in such patients.
Other hazards of oxygen include its toxicity with prolonged high concentrations,
absorption atelectasis, the suppression of the sign of hypoventilation,
and fire risk.
So the hazards of oxygen therapy include, in the chronically hypercapnic patient,
a worsening of hypercapnia — by reducing ventilation,
releasing hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction,
and the Haldane effect — risking narcosis,
so oxygen is titrated to a controlled target rather than withheld;
along with oxygen toxicity, absorption atelectasis and fire risk — hazards
requiring oxygen to be given as a carefully-controlled drug.
Describe the oxygen-haemoglobin dissociation curve and the significance of its
shifts.
The oxygen-haemoglobin dissociation curve relates the saturation of haemoglobin to
the oxygen tension, and its sigmoid shape and its shifts are central to the
carriage and delivery of oxygen.
Plotted with the percentage saturation on the vertical axis against the oxygen
partial pressure on the horizontal, the curve is sigmoid:
it is steep at low tensions and flattens at high tensions, forming a plateau.
The flat upper part means that the loading of oxygen in the lungs is well
maintained even if the alveolar oxygen falls somewhat;
the steep lower part means that large amounts of oxygen are released to the tissues
for a small fall in tension, aiding unloading.
The position is described by the P-50,
the tension at which the haemoglobin is half saturated,
normally around three and a half kilopascals.
The curve shifts: a rightward shift,
reducing affinity and aiding unloading to the tissues,
is caused by a rise in carbon dioxide and hydrogen ions — the Bohr effect — by a
rise in temperature, and by a rise in two-three-diphosphoglycerate;
a leftward shift, increasing affinity, by the opposite changes,
and by carbon monoxide and fetal haemoglobin.
So the oxygen-haemoglobin dissociation curve is sigmoid — a flat upper part
securing loading and a steep lower part aiding unloading — its position given by
the P-50; it shifts right, aiding tissue unloading, with raised carbon dioxide,
acidity, temperature and two-three-diphosphoglycerate,
and left with the opposite — shifts adapting oxygen delivery to need,
central to oxygen transport.
Describe hyperbaric oxygen therapy.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy is the administration of oxygen at a pressure greater
than atmospheric, the patient being placed in a chamber pressurised to two or three
atmospheres while breathing oxygen,
and it works by greatly increasing the amount of oxygen carried in the blood,
with particular applications.
At normal pressure, the haemoglobin is nearly fully saturated and little extra
oxygen can be carried; but raising the ambient pressure increases the amount of
oxygen dissolved in the plasma, which, by Henry's law,
is proportional to the partial pressure,
so that at three atmospheres of oxygen the dissolved oxygen rises to a level
sufficient, in principle, to supply the tissues even without haemoglobin.
This has several uses. In carbon monoxide poisoning,
the high oxygen pressure accelerates the displacement of carbon monoxide from
haemoglobin and supplies dissolved oxygen meanwhile.
In decompression sickness and air embolism,
it reduces the size of gas bubbles and improves oxygenation.
It is used to support healing in certain ischaemic and infected wounds,
and in some severe infections. Its hazards include oxygen toxicity,
with convulsions, and barotrauma.
So hyperbaric oxygen therapy delivers oxygen at raised pressure,
greatly increasing the dissolved oxygen by Henry's law;
used in carbon monoxide poisoning to displace the gas and supply oxygen,
in decompression sickness and air embolism to shrink bubbles,
and to aid healing in ischaemic wounds and severe infection — limited by oxygen
toxicity and barotrauma, an application of the gas laws to therapy.
Describe the behaviour of nitrous oxide in air-filled spaces.
Nitrous oxide, because of its solubility relative to nitrogen,
diffuses into air-filled spaces in the body faster than the nitrogen there can
leave, causing such spaces to expand or their pressure to rise,
a property of major practical importance in anaesthesia.
The body contains, normally or in disease,
various air-filled spaces whose gas is mostly nitrogen, which is poorly soluble.
When nitrous oxide is given, it is far more soluble than nitrogen — about thirty
times — so it is carried in the blood and diffuses into these spaces much faster
than the nitrogen can diffuse out; the result is a net entry of gas.
In a compliant space that can expand, such as the bowel or a pneumothorax,
the volume increases, potentially dangerously — a pneumothorax enlarging,
the bowel distending. In a non-compliant, fixed space,
such as the middle ear or an obstructed sinus, the pressure rises instead.
This limits the use of nitrous oxide where such spaces are present — in bowel
obstruction, pneumothorax, certain ear and eye surgery,
and where air has been introduced.
So nitrous oxide, being far more soluble than the nitrogen in air-filled spaces,
diffuses in faster than nitrogen leaves, so a compliant space — bowel,
pneumothorax — expands and a fixed space — middle ear,
sinus — develops a raised pressure;
a property contraindicating nitrous oxide where such spaces exist,
a key practical consideration in its use.
Describe tissue oxygenation and the concept of critical oxygen delivery.
The ultimate purpose of the whole oxygen-transport chain is to supply oxygen to the
mitochondria of the cells, and the relationship between the delivery of oxygen and
its consumption by the tissues, with the concept of a critical delivery,
is fundamental to understanding tissue oxygenation and its failure.
Normally, the delivery of oxygen to the tissues greatly exceeds their consumption,
so there is a large reserve: the tissues extract only a fraction of the oxygen
delivered, and if delivery falls, they maintain their consumption by extracting a
greater fraction — consumption is independent of delivery over a wide range.
However, if the delivery falls below a critical value — the critical oxygen
delivery — the tissues can no longer extract enough to meet their needs,
even by maximal extraction, so the consumption begins to fall and becomes dependent
on delivery; below this point the tissues turn to anaerobic metabolism,
producing lactate, and develop hypoxia and dysfunction.
This critical point, and the supply-dependence below it,
is important in shock and critical illness,
where restoring delivery above the critical level is a goal of resuscitation.
So tissue oxygen consumption is normally independent of delivery,
the tissues maintaining it by increased extraction as delivery falls;
but below the critical oxygen delivery,
extraction is maximal and consumption becomes supply-dependent,
with anaerobic metabolism, lactate and hypoxia — a relationship central to the
management of shock and the goals of resuscitation.
Describe the body's stores of oxygen.
The body holds only a small store of oxygen,
which is important because it determines how long the tissues can be supplied if
the supply is interrupted, as in apnoea, and it is the basis of pre-oxygenation.
The total body oxygen store is modest — of the order of one and a half litres
breathing air, rising to a few litres breathing oxygen.
It is distributed in several compartments: in the lungs,
in the gas of the functional residual capacity,
which is the most important and most readily augmented store; in the blood,
bound to haemoglobin and a little dissolved; and in the tissues,
bound to myoglobin and dissolved.
Because the resting oxygen consumption is around two hundred and fifty millilitres
a minute, the store breathing air would sustain the body for only a few minutes,
and rather less than that is usefully available before dangerous hypoxia.
The key point for anaesthesia is that the lung store can be greatly increased by
pre-oxygenation, replacing the nitrogen of the functional residual capacity with
oxygen — denitrogenation — so prolonging the time to desaturation in apnoea.
So the body's oxygen store is small — about one and a half litres on air — held in
the lungs as the functional residual capacity, in the blood on haemoglobin,
and in the tissues on myoglobin; sufficient for only a few minutes at resting
consumption, but the lung store is greatly increased by pre-oxygenation,
the basis of prolonging safe apnoea — a store central to the management of the
airway.
Describe the postoperative respiratory complications and their physiological basis.
Respiratory complications are among the commonest and most important problems after
surgery and anaesthesia, and their physiological basis lies in the effects of
anaesthesia and surgery on the lung volumes,
the airway and the control of breathing that we have studied.
The central change is a reduction in the functional residual capacity,
which persists into the postoperative period,
particularly after upper abdominal and thoracic surgery,
and is worsened by pain limiting inspiration and coughing,
by the residual effects of anaesthetic agents and opioids,
and by the supine position.
The reduced functional residual capacity,
with the impaired ability to cough and clear secretions,
leads to atelectasis — collapse of the dependent lung — which causes
ventilation-perfusion mismatch, shunt and hypoxaemia,
and predisposes to retained secretions and pneumonia.
The residual depression of the ventilatory drive and the hypoxic response by drugs
contributes to hypoventilation and hypoxaemia, especially during sleep.
These are mitigated by good analgesia allowing deep breathing and coughing,
by physiotherapy, by positioning, by supplemental oxygen,
and by techniques to restore lung volume.
So postoperative respiratory complications — atelectasis,
hypoxaemia and pneumonia — arise chiefly from the persisting reduction in
functional residual capacity, worsened by pain, residual drugs and position,
with impaired coughing and a depressed ventilatory drive;
their basis in the studied effects on lung volumes,
airway clearance and the control of breathing,
and their prevention resting on analgesia, physiotherapy,
positioning and oxygen — a major focus of postoperative care.
Describe the alveolar-arterial oxygen difference and its clinical use, applied here.
The alveolar-arterial oxygen difference, which we have met,
is worth drawing out as a practical tool in the assessment of the anaesthetised and
postoperative patient, since it distinguishes the causes of any hypoxaemia.
It is the difference between the alveolar oxygen tension,
calculated from the alveolar gas equation,
and the measured arterial oxygen tension. Its value lies in separating hypoxaemia
due to the lung from hypoxaemia due to causes outside the lung.
If a patient is hypoxaemic and the alveolar-arterial difference is normal,
the lung is exchanging normally and the cause is hypoventilation — a high carbon
dioxide — or a low inspired oxygen;
the treatment is to restore ventilation or inspired oxygen.
If the difference is widened, the cause is within the lung — ventilation-perfusion
mismatch, shunt from atelectasis, or a diffusion problem — directing attention to
the lung, with measures such as positive end-expiratory pressure and recruitment
for the atelectasis and shunt so common after anaesthesia.
The difference normally widens somewhat with age and with a high inspired oxygen.
So the alveolar-arterial oxygen difference,
between the calculated alveolar and measured arterial oxygen,
distinguishes hypoxaemia from hypoventilation or low inspired oxygen — a normal
difference — from intrapulmonary hypoxaemia — a widened difference, from mismatch,
shunt or diffusion problems; a practical tool guiding the diagnosis and treatment
of perioperative hypoxaemia.
Describe the principles of arterial blood gas measurement.
The arterial blood gas analysis measures the partial pressures of oxygen and carbon
dioxide and the pH of an arterial sample,
from which the acid-base and oxygenation state are assessed,
and the principles of the measuring electrodes are worth knowing.
Three electrodes make the primary measurements.
The pH is measured by a glass electrode sensitive to hydrogen ions,
generating a voltage related to the pH.
The carbon dioxide is measured by the Severinghaus electrode,
in which the carbon dioxide diffuses across a membrane into a bicarbonate solution,
changing its pH, which is measured by a pH electrode and related to the carbon
dioxide.
The oxygen is measured by the Clark electrode,
a polarographic electrode in which oxygen diffuses to a cathode and is reduced,
generating a current proportional to the oxygen tension.
From these measured values, the analyser calculates the derived quantities — the
bicarbonate, the base excess, and the saturation.
The sample must be arterial, handled anaerobically,
and analysed promptly or kept cool to prevent the ongoing metabolism of the cells
from altering the values.
So the arterial blood gas measures pH by a glass electrode,
carbon dioxide by the Severinghaus electrode through a pH change in bicarbonate
solution, and oxygen by the polarographic Clark electrode, with the bicarbonate,
base excess and saturation calculated; the sample needing to be arterial,
anaerobic and promptly analysed — the principles underlying this fundamental
investigation.
Describe the integrated effects of anaesthesia on respiratory function.
It is worth drawing together the many effects of anaesthesia on respiratory
function, since they combine to threaten oxygenation and ventilation and explain
why respiratory care is so central to anaesthesia.
Anaesthesia affects every level of the respiratory system.
It depresses the control of breathing — blunting the carbon-dioxide and especially
the hypoxic ventilatory responses and abolishing the wakefulness drive — causing
hypoventilation. It reduces the tone of the upper airway, causing obstruction.
It reduces the functional residual capacity,
through loss of muscle tone and the supine position and diaphragmatic displacement,
causing airway closure and atelectasis with shunt and impaired oxygenation.
It may provoke bronchospasm and increases dead space.
It abolishes the respiratory muscle activity with neuromuscular blockade,
requiring controlled ventilation, which itself, being positive-pressure,
affects the lung and circulation. It impairs the mucociliary clearance and the
protective reflexes.
These effects persist into recovery. Together they cause the hypoventilation,
atelectasis, hypoxaemia and impaired airway protection that the anaesthetist
anticipates and manages.
So anaesthesia integrates effects at every level — depressing the control of
breathing, reducing airway tone and functional residual capacity with atelectasis
and shunt, abolishing muscle activity, increasing dead space,
and impairing clearance and reflexes — combining to threaten oxygenation,
ventilation and airway protection; the reason that the management of respiratory
function is a constant and central concern of anaesthetic practice.
Pull it together: summarise the applied physiology of maintaining oxygenation and
ventilation.
I would summarise the applied respiratory physiology around the two tasks that
occupy the anaesthetist — maintaining oxygenation and maintaining ventilation —
each understood through the physiology we have built up.
Oxygenation is maintained along the whole oxygen cascade:
securing the inspired oxygen; pre-oxygenating to fill the small oxygen store of the
functional residual capacity and prolong safe apnoea;
maintaining lung volume against atelectasis with positive end-expiratory pressure
and recruitment; ensuring delivery by an adequate haemoglobin and cardiac output;
and recognising the types of hypoxia and the causes of hypoxaemia by the
alveolar-arterial difference and the response to oxygen.
Ventilation is maintained by supporting or controlling breathing when anaesthesia
depresses the drive and abolishes the muscles,
matching the alveolar ventilation to the carbon dioxide production,
and managing the carbon dioxide with its effects on acid-base and the cerebral
circulation in mind.
Throughout, the monitoring — the pulse oximeter,
the capnograph and the blood gases — applies the physiology to the bedside.
So the applied physiology of anaesthesia is the maintenance of oxygenation along
the oxygen cascade — inspired oxygen, pre-oxygenation, lung volume, delivery,
and the diagnosis of hypoxaemia — and of ventilation by supporting breathing and
controlling carbon dioxide; monitored by oximetry,
capnography and blood gases — the integrated application of respiratory physiology
that keeps the anaesthetised patient safe.
Thank you. An excellent account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Hypoxia (inadequate tissue oxygen supply) is classified along the oxygen
pathway: hypoxic (low arterial PO2 — respiratory causes),
anaemic (reduced carrying capacity, e.g.
anaemia/CO poisoning — low content, normal tension),
stagnant/circulatory (low flow, e.g. shock),
and histotoxic (failure of tissue O2 use, e.g. cyanide).
Second, The oxygen cascade is the stepwise fall in PO2 from atmosphere (~21 kPa) →
humidification in the airway → alveolar dilution by CO2 and uptake (alveolar gas
equation) → the alveolar-arterial difference → tissue/mitochondria (lowest);
a framework showing where oxygenation can be impaired.
Third, Cyanosis appears when deoxyhaemoglobin exceeds ~5 g/dL — central
(tongue/mucosae, arterial desaturation) vs peripheral (extremities,
increased extraction); unreliable because it depends on the absolute amount of
deoxyhaemoglobin — absent in anaemia despite hypoxia, exaggerated in polycythaemia,
and a late, subjective sign.
Fourth, Oxygen therapy raises arterial O2:
effective in hypoxic hypoxia (hypoventilation, V/Q mismatch, diffusion),
limited against true shunt, and does not correct anaemic/stagnant hypoxia;
delivered by variable-performance (nasal cannulae,
simple masks) or fixed-performance (Venturi) devices,
titrated to a target saturation, with caution in hypoxic-drive-dependent patients.
Fifth, Respiratory failure: type 1 (hypoxaemic) — low PaO2, normal/low CO2,
from impaired oxygenation with maintained ventilation (pneumonia, oedema, embolism,
ARDS); type 2 (hypercapnic) — high CO2 with hypoxaemia,
from failure of alveolar ventilation (reduced drive, pump failure, excessive load).
Hypercapnia stimulates ventilation and sympathetic activity,
causes respiratory acidosis, dilates cerebral vessels (raising ICP) and shifts the
ODC right; hypocapnia causes alkalosis, cerebral vasoconstriction,
a leftward shift, and reduced ionised calcium.
Thank you. That concludes the station.